
### `README guideline:`
[Optional] Provide example queries and results for song play analysis.

# Project: Sparkify Data Lake
### `Introduction`
An imaginary and data-simulated music streaming startup, `Sparkify`, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to an online data lake. Their data resides in `S3`, in a directory of JSON logs on `user activity on the app`, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their `data engineer`, we are tasked with `building an ETL pipeline` that `extracts their data from S3`, `processes them using Spark`, and `loads the data back into S3` as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to, how and when they listening to.

> Our transformational database and ETL pipeline should withstand test run by the data analytics team from `SPARKIFY`. The analytics team should be able to run queries against these tables to compare our results with their expected analytical results.

## `Project Description`
In this project, we'll apply what we've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on `S3`. To complete the project, we will need to `load data from S3`, `transforms them(data)` into five different tables using `Py-Spark` and write them back as `partitioned-table` into a parquet files in the directories on `S3`. Each table has its own folder within the directory. 

> `Songs-table `files are partitioned by year and then artist. `Time-table` files are partitioned by year and month and send them back to S3 bucket as a parquet file.

All the project related files must be found here with this [[Project_in_Github](https://github.com/farhadkpx/DEND-Data-Engneering-Nano-Degree-/tree/main/Data_Lake_with_Apache_SPARK)]

## `Project Datasets`
We'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

+ Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
+ Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

**`Song Dataset:`** The song dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

**`Log Dataset:`**
The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. The log files in the dataset we'll be working with are partitioned by year and month.

## `Database Star Schema Design:`
Using the song_data and log_datasets, we'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This break down comprises 1-Fact-table and 4-dimension tables. The data type schema of all the tables are kept unchanged from the given two data files. I only made a diverging change with the "ts/start_time" column from log_data file. I transformed "ts/start_time" column into six different columns with new "time" table. This dis-integration is designed to help us analyze our time-data into a more segmented form. This form of break down is very critical in data anaysis of time data.

Here the `fact-table "songplays"` truly represents the `4-dimensional tables` ( `users, songs, artists and time tables` ) with foreign/primary key in its design. So we didn't need any other transformation on those representative key columns. The only true transformation was done on "ts" column and here is a snapshot of the ts-column transformation with two UDF.

- The `"ts"` colum is in `"epoch in milliseconds"`, so we need to divide them with 1000 to convert to a timestamp with an UDF

get_timestamp = udf(lambda x: x/1000, TimestampType())

log_df = log_df.withColumn("TimeStamp", get_timestamp(log_df.ts))

- Converting timestamp to date and time with another UDF

get_datetime = udf(lambda x: datetime.fromtimestamp(x), TimestampType())

log_df = log_df.withColumn("start_time", get_datetime(log_df.TimeStamp))
    
After these "UDF" transformations we break down "ts" column into start_time(TIMESTAMP) , hour(INT), day(INT), week(INT), month(INT), year(INT), weekday(STRING) columns. Besides these schematic change all the other columns in five tables stayed the same as they came with.

> ### Fact Table
`1.` **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong with columns ( `songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent` )

> ### Dimension Tables
`2.` **users** - users in the app with columns ( `user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level` )

`3.` **songs** - songs in music database with columns ( `song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration` )

`4.` **artists** - artists in music database columns ( `artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude` )

`5.` **time** - start_time columns from songplays broken down into specific units ( `start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday(string)`)

## `Project Template Files:`
If we want to use given project template which comes along with the classroom then we can work on our project with a smaller dataset found in the workspace, and then move on to the bigger dataset on AWS. Alternatively, we can download the template files in the `Resources tab` in the classroom and work on this project on your local computer.

The project template includes three files:

+ **`etl.py`** -  reads data from S3, transforms data using Spark, and writes them back to S3

+ **`dl.cfg`** -  contains your AWS credentials

+ **`README.md provides`** - discussion on your process and decisions


## `How to run python-script files`
We can run "etl.py" file in local mode. If we want to run the "etl.py" online, we need to create a file dl.cfg in the root of this project with the following AWS-access keys. 

`KEY = "YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY"` ( This is our/your AWS access key )

`SECRET = "YOUR_AWS_SECRET_KEY"` ( AWS secret key )

We need to create a SPARK session to run the `py-SPARK` program. Then create a `S3 Bucket` named `"udacity-sparkify-data-udend"` where output results will be stored. Finally, run the following command: python etl.py.

## `ETL Pipeline Steps:`
The ETL pipeline comprises with all the consolidated steps we've developed so far to run the data transformation. In sequence `Extracting data from S3`, `transforming them as needed with py-SPARK` and `loading them back to S3 as partitioned-parquet file` all in a automated processes.

`1`. Obtaining the credentials from dl.cfg file.

`2`. Loading the Data-files which are in JSON Files(Song Data and Log Data).

`3` Transforming these files with pySpark to generate a set of Fact and Dimension Tables.

`4` Loading these files back to S3 as partitioned parquet files ready for data analysis. 

