
## Project: Cloud Data Warehouse
### `Project Description`
Sparkify, a music streaming startup has grown their user base and song database and want to move their data processes onto the cloud. Their data resides in Amazon S3 bucket, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In this project, we'll apply what we've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. As their data engineer, we’re tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of fact and dimensional tables. 

We should be able to test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to us by the analytics team from Sparkify. The analytics team should be able to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to and also able to compare our results with their expected results.

## `Project Datasets`
We'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

**Song data:** `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`

**Log data:** `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

**Log data json path:** `s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json`

### `Song Dataset`
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json` and `song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`

### `Log Dataset`
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json` and `log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

> ## `Database schema design`
We'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on user song-playing behavior. The star schema will contain a fact-table(songplays) and 4-dimension tables( users, songs, artists, time tables ). The main source of data will come from log and song dataset. We'll create multiple table join and extraction of columns from these two tables to form all the necessary tables for this project.

### `Staging Tables:`
Sourced from Amazon S3 bucket without any data type or schematic change.

`1.` `staging_events:` contains all the fields and rows from the logs.jsons dataset. 

`2.` `staging_songs:` contains all the fields and rows from the songs.jsons dataset. 

During the design processes I didn't make any `data-type` change on the selected columns except some break-down of 'timestamp' column into 6 separate columns. The `timestamp` column is manipulated into multiple columns which deems very necessary for data analysis.

### `Fact Table`
`1.` `songplays` - ( records in event/log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong ) [ `songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent` ]

### `Dimension Tables:`
`2.` `users` - ( user detail in the app ) [ `user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level` ]

`3.` `songs` - ( song detail in music database ) [ `song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration` ]

`4.` `artists` - ( artists detail in music database ) [ `artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude` ]

`5.` `time` - ( timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units ) [ `start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday` ]

> ## `Project Template Files:` 
Project template includes five files to work with this project available on project workspace.

`1.` dwh.cfg file contains all the necessary AWS credentials and database sourcing information.

`2.` sql_queries.py define and design schemas for your staging, fact and dimension tables for this project.

`3.` create_tables.py implements the logic created in sql_queries.py file to build fact and dimension table on Redshift.

`4.` etl.py is where we'll load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then insert those data into our newly created tables on Redshift.

`5.` README.md file where we'll provide discussion in detail about programming processes and decisions for this ETL pipeline.

> ## `Project implementation Steps:`
To get started with the project we can work on it in the workspace on the classroom. Alternatively, we can download the template files from the “Resources tab” in the classroom and work on this project in our local computer. Files given with `resource-tab/workspace` with brief description here.

`1.`  `dwh.cfg` file contains all the necessary credentials and file sourcing information, which connects to various aspect of AWS infrastructure to ensure that the pipeline should run effectively.

`2.` `sql_queries.py` script, where we'll define all the needed dropping, creating, inserting SQL statements and 4-listings of codes all of which will be imported into two other script files as needed.

`3.` `create_table.py` file where we'll call `drop_table_queries` to drop tables in the beginning, if the tables already exist. This way, we can run `create_tables.py` whenever you want to reset your database and test our ETL pipeline. The `create_table_queries` file will implement fact and dimension tables design in reality for the star-schema in Redshift.

`4.` `etl.py file` where we'll load data from Amazon S3 bucket into staging tables on Redshift using `copy_table_queries` list and then insert those data into the newly created tables using `insert_table_queries` list on to tables on Redshift.


## `Building ETL Pipeline(design)`
To run this project we'll need to fill in the `dwh.cfg` file with the necessary Amazon Redshift cluster credentials, IAM_ROLE information and S3-bucket data source path. The pipeline works by querying the staging log and songs tables to extract the necessary data-informations that will populate the start-schema tables. In summary these pipeline steps are.

`1.` Implement the logic in `etl.py` to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.

`2`  Implement the logic with `etl.py` to insert data from staging tables into analytics(star-schema) tables on Redshift.

`3.` Test by running `etl.py` after running `create_tables.py` and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with
     the expected results.

`4`. Delete your redshift cluster when finished.


### `Document Process`
Do the following steps in your README.md file.
1. Discuss the purpose of this database in context of the startup, Sparkify, and their analytical goals.
2. State and justify your database schema design and ETL pipeline.
3. [Optional] Provide example queries and results for song play analysis.
